JUDY WOODRUFF: But first:
President Trump continues to
repeat the unsubstantiated claim
that millions of illegal votes
were cast in the 2016 election.
The commission he set
up to look into this has
sparked its own controversy.
William Brangham reports.
DONALD TRUMP, President of
the United States: Every time
voter fraud occurs, it cancels
out the vote of a lawful citizen
and undermines democracy.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The first
meeting of the Commission on
Election Integrity convened
with a presidential
defense of its mission.
DONALD TRUMP: Throughout the
campaign, and even after,
people would come up to me and
express their concerns
about voter inconsistencies
and irregularities
which they saw, in some
cases having to do with
very large numbers of
people in certain states.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So far, those
allegations remain unproven,
but the commission is pressing
ahead.
Last month, it sent letters to
every state, asking for voter
information, including names,
birthdays and partial
Social Security numbers.
Seventeen states, governed
by Republicans and Democrats,
as well as the District of
Columbia, refused to comply.
Many others said they
will provide only limited
information that's already
publicly available.
Today, the president
criticized those states
who've refused to go along.
DONALD TRUMP: One has to wonder
what they're worried about.
And I ask the vice president
and I ask the commission,
what are they worried about?
There's something.
There always is.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Just after
the election, when Hillary
Clinton won the popular vote
by 2.8 million votes, Mr. Trump
tweeted, again, with no evidence
whatsoever, that the vote
count was skewed -- quote --
"I won the popular vote if you
deduct the millions of people
who voted illegally."
The commission co-chair,
Kansas Secretary of State Kris
Kobach, who is a Republican,
says the country deserves
a hard, dispassionate
look at the issue.
KRIS KOBACH (R), Kansas
Secretary of State: For a long
time, there has been lingering
doubt among many Americans
about integrity and
fairness of elections.
And it's not a new issue at all.
If you look at polling
data, it goes back decades.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The panel is
chaired by Vice President Pence,
and in addition to Kobach,
members include current and
former secretaries of state from
Indiana, New Hampshire, Maine
and Ohio, among others.
But critics of the commission
warn that stoking fears of
alleged fraud will be used later
to justify a crackdown
on voting rights.
Rick Hasen is a law professor
at the University of California,
Irvine, and an election law
expert.
RICK HASEN, University
of California, Irvine:
I'm concerned that it's
going to be something
that is just going to try
to support the president's
agenda, claiming that
there's a lot of voter
fraud, and use that to make
it harder for people to be
able to register to vote.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Already, the
commission is facing at least
seven lawsuits questioning
its transparency, conduct
and even its existence.
We turn now to two
officials who actually run
elections in their states.
Matthew Dunlap is the
secretary of state for Maine.
He is a Democrat, and
he's also a member of the
president's commission.
And he was at today's meeting.
We're also joined
by Michele Reagan.
She is a Republican and she is
Arizona's secretary of state.
Welcome to you both.
MATTHEW DUNLAP (D),
Maine Secretary of State:
Thank you for having us.
MICHELE REAGAN (R),
Arizona Secretary of State:
Thank you for having us.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM:
Matthew, I would love
to start with you first.
What is your general hope that
this commission - - what do
you hope it will accomplish?
MATTHEW DUNLAP: Well, my general
hope is that actually we do
something to bolster voter
confidence in how we conduct
elections in this country.
I think we have an awful
lot to be proud of.
No one is questioning the
legitimacy of the outcome
of the 2016 election.
There are some lingering
questions about how
elections have been
conducted, who was able
to vote legally or not.
And I think, and based on my
experience in the state of
Maine, I think we can very, very
proud of what our local election
officials have done to make
sure that their neighbors
get to exercise their democratic
right of self-governance.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Michele
Reagan, I know you are
a supporter broadly
of this commission
and its aims.
As you know, the commission
was set up in part because of
the president's concern that
there had been some voter
fraud in the past election.
I'm curious.
You were running the election
in Arizona back in 2016.
Did you have any instances
of fraud in your state?
MICHELE REAGAN: Well, I can't
speak, obviously, for other
states, but I know, in Arizona,
we have a number of measures
that we use to prevent fraud.
And that's not to say
fraud never happens.
Certainly, when we hear
allegations of that, we
take it very seriously.
But it's important to
note Arizona has some
laws on the books that
keep it very safe from
fraud, massive fraud.
One is the showing proof of
I.D. at the polling places.
Another is proof of citizenship
when registering to vote.
A lot of states don't
have these laws.
And so, speaking from Arizona's
point of view, coupled with the
fact that we also participate,
already, in interstate
cross-check systems,
for instances, of
double voting or double
registration, we're pretty
confident in Arizona that we
run a really good election.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Matthew
Dunlap, as I mentioned
in the report prior to
this, the commission
asked all the states for some
types of voter information.
And there was a lot of concern.
Many states pushed back.
I understand Maine didn't
share its information.
Explain to me, what
is the concern?
What are you worried about?
MATTHEW DUNLAP: Well, we're not
really worried about anything.
We just follow the law.
The request that came from the
commission, which, as commission
members, we did not review
the full text of the
letter that went out.
We did agree that the
information that should
be requested should be
requested, not demanded,
and it should only be that
information that would
be publicly available
to anyone legally
entitled to obtain it under
those particular state laws.
When we got the request, the
letter said that be advised that
any information that you provide
will be made publicly available
for anyone to inspect.
Maine election law specifies
that anyone who is qualified
to access the voter file must
keep it confidential.
And that is directory language.
Making the list available is
discretionary under the law.
So, with that direction, it was
a mathematical equation for us.
We simply could not provide
it under those circumstances.
And so we didn't.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Michele
Reagan, do you have
concerns about this
database being compiled
here in Washington, D.C.?
MICHELE REAGAN: Well,
absolutely we have concerns.
And, again, in Arizona, we
just looked to the statutes
and the law to tell us exactly
what we were going to
have to do or not do.
And the law is pretty clear
that, again, just like in Maine,
you can't take the information
via a public records
request with the intent of
sharing it or posting it
publicly or disseminate,
you know, giving it out.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Matthew
Dunlap, what about this larger
concern that has been raised by
some people that this commission
and its mission is going to be
used to justify further national
crackdown on voting rights?
What do you make of that?
MATTHEW DUNLAP: That's one of
my favorite questions to get
out of all of this, is that
somehow we're trying to
undo the electoral process.
My position is, is that you have
these lingering questions that
have been around for a while
now about illegal
activity around elections.
Sunshine is the
greatest disinfectant.
I have full confidence
that everything that's
been claimed will probably
be largely debunked.
And what we will find
will probably be the
product of mistakes and
errors and unintended
actions that were never
meant to become felonies.
So I think, you know, with that
understanding, I think we're
going to find that we have a
really pretty good system
that's very, very decentralized,
which actually adds to its
level of security against some
of the allegations that we have
heard about, like the Russian
Federation getting involved
in hacking our elections.
I think the systems that we
have in place, which are run
by local election officials,
actually will be found to
work very, very well, and that
American voters should feel
pretty good about the systems
that help us elect our
leadership and decide issues.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM:
Michele Reagan, you heard
Matthew here say that he
believes the commission
will largely debunk
many of these claims.
But just today, the co-chairman
of the commission, Kris Kobach,
said on MSNBC that he says, we
may never know whether
or not Hillary Clinton in
fact won the popular vote.
That is an implication that is
very likely the potential that
three million illegal votes
were cast.
Is the head of the commission
is making that kind of a
statement, does that concern you
at all about the thrust
of this commission?
MICHELE REAGAN: What really
concerns me is the good work
that the commission could be
doing.
And I hope -- and I have
high hopes that they
will look forward to
some of these suggestions
that states are making.
I would hope that this
commission takes what
states are doing and
determines what is working
best, so they can share
it with other states.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: All right,
Michele Reagan, Matthew Dunlap,
thank you both very much.
MATTHEW DUNLAP: Thank
you for having us.